
--- PAGE 1 ---
A Modular Architecture for
Automatic Tajweed Assessment
of Quranic Recitation
March 17, 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Contents
1 Conceptual Framework 3
1.1 The Multi-Faceted Nature of Recitation Errors . . . . . . . . 4
1.1.1 A Taxonomy of Recitation Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1.2 Why a Monolithic Approach is Insuﬀicient . . . . . . . 5
1.1.3 Requirements for a Comprehensive System . . . . . . . 5
1.2 Modular Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.1 Core Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.2 System Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.3 Overall System Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.2.4 Modular Rule Analysis: Specialisation by Acoustic
Category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.3 Feature Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.3.1 The Role of Features in Tajweed Assessment . . . . . . 11
1.3.2 Hand-Crafted Acoustic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.3.3 Self-Supervised Learning Representations . . . . . . . 12
1.3.4 Comparison and Hybrid Approaches . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.3.5 Feature Choices per Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.4 Temporal Modelling for Rule Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
1.4.1 Temporal Requirements of Tajweed Rules . . . . . . . 16
1.4.2 Comparative Analysis of Architectural Options . . . . 16
1.4.3 Baseline Choice: Bidirectional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . 18
1.4.4 Sequence Alignment: CTC Loss and Viterbi Decoding 18
1.4.5 Exploiting the Coloured Qur’an JSON: Multi-Task Su-
pervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
1.4.6 Adapting Temporal Modelling to Rule Categories . . . 22
1.4.7 Upgrade Path: Transformer-Based Architecture . . . . 22
1.5 Diagnosis Aggregation and Feedback Generation . . . . . . . . 23
1.5.1 The Need for Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
1.5.2 Aggregation Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
1.5.3 From Diagnosis to Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
1

--- PAGE 3 ---
1.5.4 Two-Level Feedback Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
1.6 Chapter Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Bibliography 27
2

--- PAGE 4 ---
Chapter 1
Conceptual Framework
The preceding chapter established the theoretical and linguistic foundations
of Tajweed, surveyed the state of the art in automated recitation assessment,
and identified the key limitations of existing systems. Building on that foun-
dation, this chapter translates the identified requirements into a concrete
system design.
The central argument of this chapter is that automated Tajweed assess-
ment cannot be treated as a single, monolithic classification problem. Errors
in Quranic recitation are heterogeneous in nature: some arise from deviat-
ing from the canonical text, others from failing to apply rules that govern
duration, assimilation, or articulation. Each error category presents distinct
acoustic characteristics and calls for a different modelling strategy. Acknowl-
edging this heterogeneity from the outset is what motivates the modular
architecture proposed here.
The chapter is organised as follows. Section 1.1 analyses the multi-faceted
nature of recitation errors and derives the essential capabilities a comprehen-
sive system must possess. Section 1.2 introduces the modular architecture as
a response to those requirements, describing each component and the over-
all information flow. Section 1.3 examines feature representation strategies,
explaining how different acoustic views of the signal serve different mod-
ules. Section 1.4 addresses temporal modelling, justifying the choice of a
Bidirectional LSTM as the baseline and discussing the upgrade path toward
Transformer-based architectures. Section 1.5 describes the diagnosis aggrega-
tion and feedback generation pipeline. Section 1.6 summarises the chapter’s
contributions and anticipates the implementation work that follows.
3

--- PAGE 5 ---
1.1 The Multi-Faceted Nature of Recitation
Errors
Before proposing a solution, it is necessary to clearly delineate the problem
space. Errors in Quranic recitation are not monolithic; they arise from dis-
tinct cognitive and articulatory sources and manifest in qualitatively different
ways. A robust assessment system must account for this heterogeneity.
1.1.1 A Taxonomy of Recitation Errors
Three fundamental categories of errors can be identified, each requiring a
different treatment.
1. Content Errors (Lexical/Phonemic). The learner deviates from
the canonical text itself. This includes word substitution (saying a
different word), word omission or insertion, and phoneme substitution
that changes word identity. For example, confusingڢَْܹص (qalb — heart)
with၍ (kalb — dog) constitutes a content error that carries seman-
tic consequences. Such errors are discrete and categorical: the learner
either said the correct word or they did not. Detection requires com-
paring what was said to what should have been said .
2. Tajweed Rule Misapplications (Prosodic/Articulatory). The
learner recites the correct words but fails to apply the proper Tajweed
rules. This category itself contains significant acoustic diversity:
• Temporal rules. Madd (elongation) requires sustaining a vowel
for a specific duration (2, 4, or 6 counts). Inﭐܳݱّ֟؇ (Aṣ-Ṣākhah),
the Alif after the Ṣād must be elongated. Ghunnah (nasalisation)
has a similar temporal component: inِ݆݁ﺭّ֟ (min rabbihim), the
Noon of min should be nasalised for two counts. These errors are
gradient — a Madd may be slightly too short or correctly sus-
tained — and their detection requires measuring acoustic proper-
ties against learned duration patterns.
• Articulatory rules. Qalqalah (echo) involves an abrupt release
burst on specific letters when they carry a sukoon. The Qāf inﭐْܳڰَ 
(Al-Falaq) at verse end must produce a characteristic bouncing
sound.
4

--- PAGE 6 ---
• Assimilation rules. Idgham (merging) involves the complete or
partial dissolution of one sound into the following sound. Inَ݆݁
لَأَْ݄ܭْ (man yaʿmal ), the Noon merges into the Yā with a nasal
quality. Ikhfa’ (concealment) requires a specific nasal transition,
as inِ݆݁ڢَٴْܭُ (min qablu ).
3. Co-Occurring Errors. A learner may mispronounce a word and mis-
apply a Tajweed rule on that same word — for instance, reciting the
wrong word but with an otherwise correct Madd elongation. The sys-
tem must be capable of disentangling these concurrent error sources so
that each can be reported and addressed independently.
1.1.2 Why a Monolithic Approach is Insuﬀicient
A single model trained to output a binary correct/incorrectlabel for an entire
recitation cannot provide useful feedback. It cannot distinguish a wrong word
from a misapplied rule, nor can it pinpoint the location or nature of the error.
More fundamentally, the three error categories described above require
different input representations and modelling strategies:
• Content errors are best detected by an ASR-like system that transcribes
the audio and compares it to a reference.
• Temporal rule errors require sequence models — such as LSTMs or
Transformers — that can track duration and state across time.
• Articulatory burst errors benefit from high-resolution time-frequency
analysis capable of capturing transient events.
• Assimilation rules require models that understand transition dynamics
between adjacent sounds.
A model designed to measure duration is not, by construction, suited to
detecting a sudden burst; a model specialised for phoneme substitution is not
adapted to assimilation dynamics. Forcing a single architecture to address
all of these tasks simultaneously introduces competing inductive biases that
degrade performance across the board.
1.1.3 Requirements for a Comprehensive System
From this analysis, the following capabilities emerge as necessary for any
comprehensive Tajweed assessment system:
5

--- PAGE 7 ---
1. Transcription capability — producing a phoneme-level hypothesis
of what was recited, enabling comparison with the canonical text.
2. Temporal sensitivity — modelling duration and state transitions to
evaluate rules such as Madd and Ghunnah.
3. Articulatory discrimination — distinguishing subtle phonetic con-
trasts, including pharyngeal versus non-pharyngeal consonants and
nasalised versus non-nasalised sounds.
4. Multi-task output — reporting simultaneously on content accuracy
and rule application at the phoneme or word level.
5. Explainability — providing a diagnostic report that identifies error
locations and types, not merely a correctness score.
These requirements motivate the modular architecture introduced in the
following section, where specialised components each address a coherent sub-
set of the problem and their outputs are combined to produce a comprehen-
sive assessment.
6

--- PAGE 8 ---
1.2 Modular Architecture Overview
Based on the analysis of error types in the preceding section, this chapter
proposes a system built from specialised modules that collaborate to produce
a comprehensive recitation assessment. This section gives a high-level view
of the components and their interactions.
1.2.1 Core Principles
The architecture is guided by four principles:
1. Separation of concerns. Each module addresses one well-defined
sub-problem — content verification, temporal rule detection, articula-
tory analysis — so that components can be developed, evaluated, and
improved independently.
2. Reference awareness. The system must know the canonical text and
the Tajweed rules that apply to each position within it. This knowl-
edge is encoded in the Coloured Qur’an JSON, a resource that maps
every character to its applicable rule and an associated colour identi-
fier. It plays three distinct roles across the pipeline: as an auxiliary
supervision signal during model training, as the knowledge source for
rule-specific feedback, and as a visualisation layer that makes system
output interpretable to learners.
3. Multi-level output. Assessment is produced at multiple granularities
— global, per-word, per-phoneme, and per-rule — to support both
coarse correctness judgments and fine-grained feedback.
4. Pedagogical grounding. The modular structure mirrors how Tajweed
is traditionally taught: rules are introduced individually and then in-
tegrated. This alignment makes the system’s outputs naturally inter-
pretable by teachers and learners alike.
1.2.2 System Components
Table 1.1 summarises the five main components of the proposed system and
their respective roles.
7

--- PAGE 9 ---
Table 1.1: System components and their roles.
Component Role
Feature Extrac-
tion
Transforms the raw audio waveform into numeri-
cal representations suitable for downstream mod-
ules. Different modules may consume different fea-
ture types depending on the acoustic properties they
target.
Content Verifica-
tion
Produces a phoneme-level transcription of what was
recited and aligns it with the canonical text, identi-
fying substitutions, deletions, and insertions.
Rule Analysis
Modules
A set of specialised detectors, each responsible for one
rule or a group of acoustically similar rules (e.g., a
Madd duration module, a Ghunnah nasalisation mod-
ule, a Qalqalah burst module).
Diagnosis Aggre-
gation
Collects all module outputs, resolves interactions be-
tween content errors and rule judgments, and pro-
duces a structured, phoneme-level error report.
Feedback Genera-
tion
Translates the structured error report into human-
readable corrective guidance for the learner.
1.2.3 Overall System Flow
Figure 1.1 illustrates the sequential flow of information through the pipeline.
Raw
Audio
F eature
Extraction
Content
V erification
Rule
Analysis
Modules
Diagnosis
Aggregation
F eedback
Generation
MFCC / SSL ASR + Viterbi JSON er-
ror object
Coloured
Qur’an
JSON
Figure 1.1: Overall information flow of the proposed system. The Coloured
Qur’an JSON (dashed) provides reference annotations to the content verifi-
cation, rule analysis, and feedback generation components.
The system operates in eight steps:
8

--- PAGE 10 ---
1. Audio input. The learner’s recitation is recorded and passed to the
feature extraction module.
2. Feature extraction. The waveform is converted into multiple feature
representations that are distributed to downstream modules according
to their requirements.
3. Content verification. An ASR-based module produces a phoneme-
level transcription and aligns it with the canonical text derived from the
Coloured Qur’an JSON.
4. Content error marking. Substitutions, deletions, and insertions rel-
ative to the canonical text are recorded as content errors.
5. Segment routing. Using the alignment from Step 3, the system iden-
tifies which audio segments correspond to positions where Tajweed rules
apply and routes each segment to the appropriate rule module.
6. Rule analysis. Each rule module examines its assigned segment and re-
turns a judgment (correct / incorrect) with supporting diagnostic details
where available (e.g., measured versus expected duration for a Madd
rule).
7. Diagnosis aggregation. The aggregator collects all judgments, re-
solves interactions between content errors and rule assessments, and
produces a complete structured error report.
8. Feedback generation. The error report is translated into learner-
facing corrective guidance, referencing the specific Tajweed rules in-
volved.
1.2.4 Modular Rule Analysis: Specialisation by Acous-
tic Category
A key design decision is that the rule analysis stage is not a single detector
but a collection of specialist modules, each responsible for an acoustically
coherent group of rules. Figure 1.2 illustrates this internal structure.
9

--- PAGE 11 ---
Aligned
Audio
Segments
Module A
Duration
Rules
(Madd,
Ghunnah)
MFCC + BiLSTM
Module B
T ransition
Rules
(Idgham,
Ikhfa’)
Hybrid stream
Module C
Burst Rules
(Qalqalah)
F usion
Layer
Structured
Error
Report
Figure 1.2: Internal structure of the rule analysis stage. Each specialist
module handles an acoustically homogeneous group of Tajweed rules; the
fusion layer consolidates their outputs into a single structured error report.
Three acoustic categories are identified:
• Duration rules (Module A). Rules such as Madd and Ghunnah
require tracking a sustained acoustic state across many frames. A se-
quence model with long-range memory — specifically a BiLSTM — is
well suited to this task and is used in conjunction with MFCC features.
• Transition rules (Module B). Rules such as Idgham and Ikhfa’ in-
volve acoustic dynamics that unfold across a phoneme boundary. These
rules benefit from both contextual representations (for understanding
what sounds are involved) and local spectral detail (for verifying correct
execution), motivating a hybrid MFCC and SSL stream.
• Burst rules (Module C). Rules such as Qalqalah involve a brief,
abrupt acoustic event. A CNN-based detector with high temporal res-
olution is appropriate here.
This specialisation by acoustic category means that each module can be
independently configured, trained, and evaluated. New rules can be added
by assigning them to an existing category or by creating a new module —
without modifying the rest of the system. The fusion layer then aggregates
all module outputs into the unified structured error report that feeds the
diagnosis and feedback stages.
10

--- PAGE 12 ---
1.3 Feature Representation
Before any analysis can take place, raw audio must be converted into a form
that machine learning models can process. This transformation is critical:
the choice of feature representation determines what information is available
to downstream modules and directly impacts their performance. Different
error types benefit from different feature representations, and the modular
architecture accommodates this flexibility by allowing each module to con-
sume the features best suited to its task.
1.3.1 The Role of Features in Tajweed Assessment
Features serve as the bridge between the raw waveform and the abstract
concepts to be detected: phonemes, words, and Tajweed rule applications.
A good feature representation should preserve the information needed for
these tasks while suppressing irrelevant variation such as background noise,
recording volume, or speaker differences.
For Tajweed assessment, three types of analysis must be supported:
• Phoneme recognition for content verification — identifying which
sounds were actually produced.
• Duration measurement for temporal rules like Madd and Ghunnah
— tracking how long a sound is sustained.
• Fine-grained articulatory discrimination for rules like Qalqalah
and Ikhfa’ — detecting subtle differences in how sounds are produced.
No single feature representation is optimal for all three purposes. As
noted in the literature, different speech tasks benefit from different acoustic
representations [ 6, 13]. The following subsections describe the two princi-
pal families of features considered in this work and explain when each is
appropriate.
1.3.2 Hand-Crafted Acoustic Features
The most established approach in speech processing is to design features
based on knowledge of human auditory perception and speech production.
These features are computed through fixed mathematical transformations
that require no training data.
Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coeﬀicients (MFCCs) are the most widely
used hand-crafted speech feature and have been successfully applied in mul-
tiple Tajweed detection systems [ 2, 1, 12]. The extraction pipeline segments
11

--- PAGE 13 ---
the waveform into short overlapping frames (typically 20–40 ms), maps en-
ergy onto the Mel perceptual scale, and compresses the result into a compact
coeﬀicient vector (commonly 13 coeﬀicients per frame). Appending first-
and second-order delta coeﬀicients ( ∆, ∆2) additionally captures the tempo-
ral dynamics of articulation — how sounds change and transition — yielding
a 39-dimensional feature vector per frame [ 1].
The Mel scale approximates the non-linear frequency sensitivity of the
human auditory system, making MFCCs particularly effective for speech
tasks [ 6]. For Tajweed assessment, MFCCs are well suited to:
• Phoneme recognition, as they capture spectral distinctions between
different sounds.
• Duration measurement, since the frame-by-frame representation allows
temporal length to be directly observed.
• Distinguishing emphatic from non-emphatic consonants and other spec-
trally distinct contrasts relevant to Arabic phonology.
1.3.3 Self-Supervised Learning Representations
A more recent and powerful approach uses representations learned by deep
neural networks trained on large quantities of unlabelled speech. Models such
as wav2vec 2.0 [ 4], HuBERT [ 10], and Whisper [ 11] are pre-trained on hun-
dreds of thousands to millions of hours of audio, developing rich hierarchical
representations without any labelled data.
Pre-training objectives. During pre-training, these models learn to
predict hidden aspects of the speech signal — for example, wav2vec 2.0 uses
contrastive learning to identify true speech representations among distrac-
tors. Through this process the models develop internal representations that
capture low-level acoustic structure (formant frequencies, pitch), mid-level
phonetic patterns (typical phoneme sequences), and high-level linguistic con-
tent (word boundaries, speaker characteristics).
Output representation. Like MFCCs, these models produce one vector
per frame of audio; however, these vectors are considerably richer (typically
hundreds to thousands of dimensions) and encode not only local acoustic
information but also contextual relationships spanning the entire utterance.
Advantages for Tajweed assessment. Several properties make SSL
representations particularly valuable in the Quranic recitation domain:
• Effectiveness with limited labelled data. The models learn gen-
eral speech representations during pre-training; fine-tuning on a small
12

--- PAGE 14 ---
labelled Tajweed dataset can therefore yield strong performance [ 3].
This is critical given the scarcity of large annotated Quranic recitation
corpora.
• Robustness to speaker and recording variation. Pre-training on
thousands of speakers and diverse acoustic conditions produces repre-
sentations that generalise well to unseen voices and environments.
• Contextual awareness. Transformer-based encoders incorporate sur-
rounding context, helping to disambiguate similar phonemes and un-
derstand transitions — essential for assimilation rules such as Idgham
and Ikhfa’ .
• A vailability of Arabic-specific models. Multilingual models such
as XLSR-53 include Arabic, and versions fine-tuned specifically on Ara-
bic speech are publicly available, providing an excellent foundation for
Quranic audio analysis [ 3].
1.3.4 Comparison and Hybrid Approaches
Table 1.2 summarises the trade-offs between the two feature families across
the dimensions most relevant to Tajweed assessment.
13

--- PAGE 15 ---
Table 1.2: Comparison of hand-crafted and self-supervised feature represen-
tations.
Aspect Hand-crafted
(MFCC)
Self-Supervised
(wav2vec 2.0)
Information captured Spectral envelope per
frame; local dynamics
via ∆ coeﬀicients.
Hierarchical represen-
tations from low-level
acoustics to linguistic
content, with full ut-
terance context.
Data requirements None — computed via
fixed transformations.
Large unlabelled cor-
pora for pre-training;
modest labelled data
for fine-tuning.
Robustness Sensitive to noise and
speaker variation.
Highly robust due to di-
verse pre-training data.
Contextual scope Local frame transitions
only.
Full utterance context
via self-attention.
Computational cost Low — computable on
CPU.
High — requires GPU
acceleration.
Interpretability High — coeﬀicients
correspond to specific
spectral properties.
Low — representations
are learned and opaque.
Primary Tajweed use Duration measurement;
basic phoneme discrim-
ination.
Phoneme recognition;
context-dependent
rules (Idgham, Ikhfa’).
The two feature families are not mutually exclusive; indeed, combining
them can leverage the strengths of each while mitigating their respective
weaknesses [ 8]. In a multi-stream configuration, hand-crafted and SSL
features are processed in parallel by separate pathways and their outputs
are fused at a later stage — typically through concatenation or an attention
mechanism. The MFCC stream contributes precise local measurements; the
SSL stream contributes robust, context-aware representations. For rules that
require both — such as Idgham, which demands contextual knowledge of
which sounds are involved and acoustic verification that merging occurred
— this hybrid approach is particularly appropriate.
14

--- PAGE 16 ---
1.3.5 Feature Choices per Module
Given the modular architecture, feature representation is a per-module de-
cision:
• The content verification module uses an SSL encoder (specifically a
wav2vec 2.0 model fine-tuned on Arabic speech) to maximise phoneme
recognition accuracy with limited labelled data [ 3].
• The temporal rule modules (Madd, Ghunnah) use MFCCs with
delta coeﬀicients, which have been validated for duration-based tasks
in prior work [ 2] and are computationally lightweight.
• The articulatory and assimilation rule modules (Qalqalah, Ikhfa’,
Idgham) are to be developed in later iterations, with the option of
incorporating hybrid multi-stream features if preliminary evaluation
indicates this is necessary.
This staged approach allows the core architecture to be validated with
well-understood features before investing in more complex representations
for specialised modules.
15

--- PAGE 17 ---
1.4 Temporal Modelling for Rule Detection
Many Tajweed rules are inherently temporal in nature. Rules such as Madd
(elongation) and Ghunnah (nasalisation) require sustaining a sound for a
specific duration, while rules such as Idgham (assimilation) involve smooth
transitions between sounds over time. Detecting these rules therefore requires
models that can capture and represent temporal dependencies within the
speech signal.
This section examines the architectural choices for temporal modelling,
justifies the selection of a Bidirectional LSTM as the baseline, and then ad-
dresses two interconnected questions: how the model resolves the alignment
between audio frames and phoneme labels, and — more importantly — how
the Coloured Qur’an JSON can be exploited not merely as a post-hoc refer-
ence but as an active supervision signal during training.
1.4.1 Temporal Requirements of Tajweed Rules
Different categories of Tajweed rules impose distinct requirements on tem-
poral modelling:
• Duration-based rules (Madd, Ghunnah) require measuring how long
a stable acoustic state persists. The model must track the continua-
tion of a sound across multiple frames and compare its duration to an
expected value.
• Transition-based rules (Idgham, Ikhfa’) require understanding how
acoustic features evolve from one sound to the next. These rules call for
modelling the trajectory of change rather than static frame properties.
• Burst rules (Qalqalah) involve brief acoustic events that must be
precisely localised within the temporal sequence.
As demonstrated by Al Harere and Al Jallad [ 2], models that treat each
frame independently perform significantly worse than those that explicitly
model temporal structure, confirming that temporal modelling is not optional
but essential for accurate Tajweed assessment.
1.4.2 Comparative Analysis of Architectural Options
Table 1.3 presents a comparative analysis of the main architectural families
across evaluation criteria relevant to Tajweed assessment, synthesising results
from the reviewed literature.
16

--- PAGE 18 ---
Table 1.3: Comparative evaluation of temporal modelling architectures for
Tajweed assessment.
Criterion CNN LSTM / BiLSTM Transformer
Local pattern
modelling
Excellent — con-
volutions inherently
capture local spec-
tral structure [ 12].
Good — sequential
processing learns lo-
cal patterns.
Good — attention
can focus on local
context.
Long-range de-
pendencies
Limited — recep-
tive field grows
slowly; struggles
with sustained
Madd [ 12].
Strong — gated
memory maintains
information across
many frames [ 9].
Excellent — self-
attention directly
relates any two
positions [ 4].
Bidirectional
context
Requires two-pass
processing.
Native — BiLSTM
processes forward
and backward si-
multaneously [7].
Native — self-
attention accesses
all positions.
Data eﬀiciency High — effec-
tive with limited
data [ 12].
Moderate — re-
quires more data
than CNN but less
than Transformers
from scratch [ 2].
Low to Moderate
— pre-training re-
duces labelled data
needs [ 3].
Empirical
performance
(Arabic)
89% accuracy on 6-
class Tajweed [ 12].
95–96% on Tajweed
rules [ 2, 1].
PER as low as 3.1%
on Arabic phoneme
recognition [ 3].
Suitability for
duration rules
Moderate. Excellent — cell
state can track
frame-level dura-
tion.
Good — can learn
duration via atten-
tion patterns.
Suitability for
transition rules
Limited. Excellent — bidi-
rectional context
captures how
sounds evolve into
each other.
Excellent — at-
tention models
cross-phoneme rela-
tionships.
Suitability for
burst rules
Good — learns local
burst patterns.
Good — sequen-
tial context localises
events.
Excellent — at-
tention precisely
identifies event
positions.
17

--- PAGE 19 ---
1.4.3 Baseline Choice: Bidirectional LSTM
Based on the analysis in Table 1.3, a Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) is se-
lected as the primary temporal modelling architecture for the initial proto-
type. This choice is motivated by four considerations:
1. Direct empirical validation. LSTMs have been specifically vali-
dated for Tajweed detection, achieving 95–96% accuracy on rules with
temporal components [ 2]. This provides a stronger foundation than ar-
chitectures whose Tajweed-specific performance remains unconfirmed.
2. Architectural suitability across rule types. The gated memory
mechanism aligns naturally with duration-based rules, as the cell state
can maintain activation while acoustic features remain stable. Bidi-
rectional processing provides access to both past and future context,
which is essential for transition-based rules such as Idgham.
3. Practical feasibility. BiLSTMs offer an effective balance between
representational power and computational requirements, making them
trainable on datasets of modest size — an important consideration
given the limited availability of labelled Tajweed data.
4. Balanced performance. As shown in Table 1.3, BiLSTMs perform
competitively across all three rule categories, making them a robust
baseline before any rule-specific specialisation is introduced.
1.4.4 Sequence Alignment: CTC Loss and Viterbi De-
coding
Before the model can predict anything at the phoneme level, it must solve a
more fundamental problem: the input sequence and the output sequence are
not the same length and are not aligned in advance.
A recording of the wordَ݁؇(Mālik) produces, say, 120 audio frames, yet
the phoneme sequence contains only 5 labels: [m, a￿, l, i, k] . The model
must learn which frames correspond to which phoneme — but manually
annotating frame boundaries for every training utterance is prohibitively
expensive.
Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) resolves this by re-
framing the training objective. Rather than requiring the model to predict
the correct phoneme at each individual frame, CTC asks only that the model
produce the correct phoneme sequence somewhere across the full recording.
Internally, CTC marginalises over all possible ways of distributing 5 labels
18

--- PAGE 20 ---
across 120 frames, and guides the model toward whichever distributions best
explain the audio. The model therefore learns what was said without needing
to be told exactly when each phoneme occurs.
Viterbi decoding recovers that timing information at inference time.
Given the frame-level probability scores produced by the trained model,
Viterbi finds the single most probable path through the sequence — yielding
not just the phoneme labels but their frame boundaries. Knowing that frames
t1 to t2 correspond to the vowel a￿, for instance, allows the system to mea-
sure its duration precisely and determine whether a Madd elongation meets
the required count. As Xie et al. [ 14] demonstrated, this alignment is supe-
rior to simple edit-distance matching because it can incorporate phonetically
informed transition probabilities, producing more accurate error localisation.
In summary, CTC and Viterbi together serve a single purpose: they
provide the frame-to-phoneme alignment that all downstream analysis
— duration measurement, rule checking, error reporting — depends on. They
say nothing about which rule was active at each position. That is where the
Coloured Qur’an JSON enters.
1.4.5 Exploiting the Coloured Qur’an JSON: Multi-
Task Supervision
The Limitation of Audio-Only Training
A model trained with CTC alone learns to transcribe what it hears. It
becomes good at recovering the phoneme sequence but remains entirely ag-
nostic about Tajweed rules: it has no internal representation of whether a
given vowel should be a Madd, or whether the nasal sound it just decoded
should be a Ghunnah. Rule violations can only be detected after the fact, by
comparing the decoded sequence against the canonical reference.
This is a missed opportunity. The Coloured Qur’an JSON already en-
codes, for every character in the canonical text, the exact Tajweed rule that
applies at that position. If the audio can be aligned with the text — which
CTC and Viterbi provide — then this rule information can be injected di-
rectly into training as a second supervision signal.
The Multi-Task Principle
The proposed solution is to equip the model with two output heads that
are trained simultaneously on the same shared BiLSTM representation:
• Head 1 — Phoneme recognition , trained with CTC loss to produce
19

--- PAGE 21 ---
the phoneme sequence from the audio. This head is responsible for the
alignment problem described above.
• Head 2 — Rule classification , trained with cross-entropy loss to pre-
dict, at each phoneme position, which Tajweed rule is active. The su-
pervision labels come directly from the Coloured Qur’an JSON, mapped
to the audio via the frame boundaries recovered by Viterbi.
The two losses are combined into a single joint objective:
L = λctc Lctc + λrule Lrule (1.1)
where λctc and λrule are weighting hyperparameters that balance the two
objectives.
A Concrete Example
Consider the phraseِْ݆݁ڢَٴْܭُ (min qablu ). The Coloured Qur’an JSON an-
notates the Noon of min with the rule Ikhfa’, indicating that it must be
partially concealed with a nasal quality before the Qāf.
During training on a correct recitation of this phrase:
1. CTC aligns the audio frames to the phoneme sequence [m, i, n ikhfa,
q, a, b, l, u] .
2. Viterbi recovers the frame boundaries — for instance, the Noon occu-
pies frames 40–65.
3. Head 1 is supervised to output n at those frames.
4. Head 2 is supervised to output Ikhfa' at those same frames, with the
label drawn from the JSON.
During inference on a learner’s recitation, if the Noon at that position is
decoded by Head 2 as Izhar (clear pronunciation) instead of Ikhfa', the sys-
tem immediately flags a rule error — without needing any separate post-hoc
comparison step. The model has learned to be rule-aware by construction ,
not just phoneme-aware.
Figure 1.3 illustrates this dual-head architecture.
20

--- PAGE 22 ---
F eature
Sequence
(MFCC
/ SSL)
Shared
BiLSTM
Encoder
Head 1
Phoneme
Recognition
Head 2
Rule
Classification
CTC Loss
audio only
Cross-
Entropy
JSON labels
Coloured
Qur’an
JSON
Joint Loss
L =
λctcLctc+λruleLrule
Figure 1.3: Dual-head multi-task architecture. The shared BiLSTM encoder
feeds two output heads trained simultaneously: Head 1 learns phoneme recog-
nition from the audio via CTC loss; Head 2 learns rule classification from the
Coloured Qur’an JSON labels via cross-entropy loss. The combined objective
forces the shared representation to be informative for both tasks.
Why This is a Better Use of the JSON
Prior approaches treat the canonical text purely as a post-hoc reference: the
system decodes the audio, then compares the result to the reference to find
errors. The Coloured Qur’an JSON is used only at the comparison step, after
all learning has already occurred.
The multi-task approach moves the JSON inside the learning process.
The shared BiLSTM representation must now be simultaneously useful for
recognising phonemes from audio and for predicting rule labels from the
JSON. This creates a strong inductive bias: the model cannot simply learn
spectral patterns in isolation; it must also learn what those patterns mean
in terms of Tajweed rules. Three practical benefits follow:
• Rule-aware representations. The shared encoder develops inter-
nal features that are sensitive to rule-relevant acoustic properties —
the duration of a vowel, the nasality of a transition — because these
properties are exactly what the rule head is trained to predict.
• Direct rule output at inference. Head 2 produces a rule prediction
for every phoneme position without any additional comparison step.
Deviations from the expected rule are flagged immediately, providing
richer error information than a simple correct/incorrect label.
• Compensation for data scarcity. The JSON annotation is effec-
tively free: it requires no additional audio recording, only alignment.
21

--- PAGE 23 ---
It therefore provides a dense supervision signal that partially compen-
sates for the limited size of available labelled Tajweed datasets.
1.4.6 Adapting Temporal Modelling to Rule Categories
Within the modular architecture, the BiLSTM can be configured differently
per rule category:
• Madd and Ghunnah modules rely on the LSTM cell state to main-
tain activation while the relevant acoustic features persist, effectively
tracking duration across the required counts.
• Idgham and Ikhfa’ modules exploit bidirectional processing to model
how one sound transitions into the next, with both past and future con-
text contributing to the assimilation judgment.
• Qalqalah modules use the sequential context to confirm that an
abrupt burst event occurs at the correct position on a saakin letter,
reducing false positives from burst-like events elsewhere in the signal.
1.4.7 Upgrade Path: Transformer-Based Architecture
The modular design accommodates future upgrades at the level of individual
modules. Where performance is found to be insuﬀicient after initial evalua-
tion, a BiLSTM module can be replaced by a Transformer encoder — such
as a fine-tuned wav2vec 2.0 or HuBERT — without altering the rest of the
system. The multi-task supervision scheme described in Section 1.4.5 trans-
fers directly to this upgrade: the same dual-head design applies, with the
Transformer encoder replacing the BiLSTM as the shared backbone. Such
models have demonstrated state-of-the-art results on Arabic mispronuncia-
tion detection [ 3] and represent a natural next step as additional training
data becomes available or as the rule coverage of the system expands.
22

--- PAGE 24 ---
1.5 Diagnosis Aggregation and Feedback Gen-
eration
The preceding modules — feature extraction, content verification, and rule
analysis — each produce specialised outputs. The final stage of the archi-
tecture consolidates these outputs into a coherent diagnosis and translates it
into actionable feedback for the learner. This section describes the design of
the diagnosis aggregation and feedback generation components.
1.5.1 The Need for Aggregation
The modular architecture produces two streams of information that must be
reconciled:
• The content verification module provides a phoneme-level align-
ment indicating substitutions, deletions, and insertions relative to the
canonical text.
• Each rule analysis module provides a judgment (correct/incorrect)
at every position where its rule applies, along with supporting diagnos-
tic details such as measured duration or confidence score.
These outputs are not independent. A rule judgment may be meaningless
when applied to a word that was misrecited: if the learner substituted an
entirely different word, the Tajweed rules expected for the original word
cannot be fairly assessed. The aggregation module resolves such interactions
to produce a consistent overall diagnosis.
1.5.2 Aggregation Strategy
The aggregation module follows a hierarchical decision process:
1. Content verification first. The phoneme-level alignment establishes
what was actually said. Positions flagged as content errors (substitu-
tion, deletion, or insertion) are recorded as such.
2. Rule judgment collection. For positions without content errors, the
judgments from each active rule module are collected. Where multiple
rules apply to the same position, all relevant judgments are preserved.
3. Conflict handling. Where rule modules produce conflicting informa-
tion on the same segment, all judgments are retained in the diagnosis
object, as multiple errors can co-occur.
23

--- PAGE 25 ---
The output of aggregation is a structured error object in JSON format,
for example:
{
" word ": " Malik ",
" canonical_phonemes ": ["m", "a:", "l", "i", "k"],
" predicted_phonemes ": ["m", "a", "l", "i", "k"],
" errors ": [
{
" position ": 1,
" type ": " rule_error ",
" rule ": " Madd ",
" detail ": " vowel duration insufficient (1 count ,
expected 2)"
}
]
}
This structured representation is technology-agnostic: it can be produced
by any underlying acoustic model and consumed by any feedback generator,
preserving the modularity of the overall system.
1.5.3 From Diagnosis to Feedback
Every automated Tajweed assessment system reviewed in the literature stops
at detection [ 5]. Systems output a correctness label but provide no guidance
on how to correct the mistake. The feedback generation module is designed
to close this gap.
The module receives the JSON error object and must produce human-
readable corrective guidance that is clear, actionable, and grounded in the
specific Tajweed rule violated. Several properties are required:
• Clarity — feedback must be understandable to learners with varying
levels of Tajweed knowledge.
• Actionability — feedback should state what to do differently, not
merely what was wrong.
• Rule specificity — feedback should reference the applicable Tajweed
rule and, where relevant, the articulatory mechanism involved (makhraj,
duration count, etc.).
• Selective presentation — not all errors need to be presented simul-
taneously; the system should prioritise the most significant issues in a
given recitation.
24

--- PAGE 26 ---
1.5.4 Two-Level Feedback Architecture
The feedback generation pipeline is structured in two levels, following the
approach proposed by Xie et al. [ 14]:
1. Level 1 — Error summarisation. A small fine-tuned language
model converts the structured JSON error object into a concise natural-
language description of the error. For example: “In the word Mālik,
the long vowel after Mīm was held for one count instead of the required
two. ”
2. Level 2 — Corrective guidance. A second stage generates the
actionable corrective message, grounding the explanation in Tajweed
terminology and articulatory guidance. For example: “This is a Madd
error. The Alif vowel must be sustained for two full counts. Maintain
the open mouth position throughout the elongation without interrup-
tion. ”
25

--- PAGE 27 ---
1.6 Chapter Summary
This chapter has presented the conceptual framework for an automatic Tajweed
assessment system built on a modular architecture.
The chapter opened by establishing that recitation errors are not homo-
geneous: content errors (deviations from the canonical text), Tajweed rule
misapplications (temporal, articulatory, and assimilation errors), and co-
occurring combinations of the two each require distinct detection strategies.
This heterogeneity makes a single monolithic model unsuitable and moti-
vates a design in which specialist components address acoustically coherent
subsets of the problem.
The proposed architecture comprises five components — feature extrac-
tion, content verification, rule analysis modules, diagnosis aggregation, and
feedback generation — connected by a clear information flow. The rule anal-
ysis stage is itself modular: duration rules, transition rules, and burst rules
are handled by separate modules, each configured for the acoustic properties
of its category. New rules can be added to the system by assigning them to
an existing module or creating a new one, without modifying the rest of the
pipeline.
Feature representation is treated as a per-module decision. Hand-crafted
MFCC features are adopted for temporal rule modules, where interpretability
and computational eﬀiciency are priorities. SSL-based representations are
adopted for the content verification module, where robustness and contextual
awareness are required and where the pre-training transfer compensates for
limited labelled data. Hybrid multi-stream approaches remain available for
modules that require both.
Temporal modelling is anchored by a Bidirectional LSTM baseline, val-
idated on Tajweed tasks in the literature and well suited across all three
rule categories. CTC loss and Viterbi decoding provide the sequence align-
ment mechanism that enables fine-grained, phoneme-level error localisation.
A clear upgrade path to Transformer-based architectures is preserved within
the modular structure.
Finally, the diagnosis and feedback components translate technical detec-
tion outputs into structured error reports and, ultimately, into learner-facing
corrective guidance. The feedback generation pipeline is described at the
conceptual level; its detailed design is deferred to a later stage of develop-
ment, once the detection modules are operational and their outputs can be
characterised empirically.
The following chapter details the implementation of this framework: the
datasets employed, the training protocols, and the experimental configura-
tions to be evaluated.
26

--- PAGE 28 ---
Bibliography
[1] Abdelfatah Ahmed, Mohamed Bader, Ismail Shahin, Ali Bou Nassif,
Naoufel Werghi, and Mohammad Basel. Arabic mispronunciation recog-
nition system using lstm network. Information, 14(7):413, 2023. doi:
10.3390/info14070413.
[2] Ahmad Al Harere and Khloud Al Jallad. Mispronunciation detection
of basic quranic recitation rules using deep learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06429, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06429.
[3] Norah Alrashoudi, Hend Al-Khalifa, and Yousef Alotaibi. Improving
mispronunciation detection and diagnosis for non-native learners of the
arabic language. Discover Computing , 28(1):1, 2025. doi: 10.1007/
s10791-024-09489-8.
[4] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech repre-
sentations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:
12449–12460, 2020.
[5] Sener Birgun. A review of automated quranic recitation assessment
systems. Journal of Islamic Studies and Technology , 2026.
[6] Steven Davis and Paul Mermelstein. Comparison of parametric rep-
resentations for monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken
sentences. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ing, 28(4):357–366, 1980. doi: 10.1109/TASSP.1980.1163420.
[7] Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Framewise phoneme classification
with bidirectional lstm and other neural network architectures. Neural
Networks, 18(5-6):602–610, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2005.06.042.
[8] Esraa Hassan, Abeer Saber, Omar Alqahtani, Nora El-Rashidy, and
Samar Elbedwehy. An innovative approach to advanced voice classifica-
27

--- PAGE 29 ---
tion of sacred quranic recitations through multimodal fusion. Egyptian
Informatics Journal , 30:100640, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2025.100640.
[9] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory.
Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.
1735.
[10] Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-
supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hid-
den units. In ICASSP, pages 706–710. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/
ICASSP39728.2021.9414231.
[11] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine
McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via large-scale
weak supervision. Proceedings of ICML, pages 28492–28518, 2023.
[12] Mas Muhammad Aqil Salim, Ani Dijah Rahajoe, and Anggraini Puspita
Sari. Dataset ratio experiment for tajweed law recognition using mfcc
and cnn features. JEEMECS, 8(2):91–97, 2025. doi: 10.26905/jeemecs.
v8i2.14789.
[13] Vibha Tiwari. Mfcc and its applications in speaker recognition. Inter-
national Journal on Emerging Technologies , 1(1):19–22, 2010.
[14] Yanlu Xie, Huihang Zhong, Xuhui Lan, and Wenwei Dong. Mispronunci-
ation detection and diagnosis based on large language models. Computer
Speech & Language, 99:101942, 2026. doi: 10.1016/j.csl.2026.101942.
28